And you did it, you hooked up a WebSocket
to your very own domain name.
Now, Jem sack.lol is realtime and live.
We can all enjoy it for
the power of the WebSocket and
a little bit of engine X tuning.
And if you got stuck somewhere along
the way, there were a lot of steps and
that it really easy to go a bit of a.
The link to the WebSocket example is
in the slides it's in GitHub repo,
it's all fully fleshed out and
tested, it does work.
So if you're stuck,
just go in there and make a copy or
find out where you missed a line there.
So, let's move on and
let's talk about databases.
Why do databases exist?
Why don't we just save
everything to a file?
Database seem like a lot of work for
what reason?
Why can't we just save
everything to a file?
>> They're unorganized.
>> Unorganized, yeah.
>> Inefficient to analyze that data
access the data across multiple files.
>> Yeah, yeah, it's inefficient,
you can't really access the data
across multiple files, what else?
>> The structuring of it allows you
to go directly to a relevant thing,
while if it were just a normal file,
you might have to read the entire thing.
>> I like that, yeah,
databases give you structure for
the file which can be unstructured.
Yeah, these are all good answers,
we use databases because
one a file doesn't scale.
How are you gonna have multiple
servers writing to one file?
Because the file can only exist
on one hard disk at a time, so
we can save everything to a file today.
But if we have two servers, it's not
gonna work anymore it breaks down.
Build one is about structure,
how do you save things to a file?
What if my opinion about the structure of
saving data to a file is different from
your opinion?
There's no enforcement there, so
the kind of exalting useless.
I recall this out earlier when we talked
about the modern computing stack,
but everything you gonna do.
This is my favorite quote from my
CS professor is he said, Jem, and
he said this right before I graduated,
he's like, Jem 90% of the stuff you're
gonna be doing in your career is reading
and writing if databases, that's it.
Anyway, it's funny but you think
about what you do in your day-to-day,
what do you actually do?
At the core of what you're doing,
you're reading from some API,
probably writing from an API.
Those APIs you're reading and writing
from maybe another system or service for
maybe another database.
And that's why in
the modern computing stack,
the database is always there cuz we're
never just reading writing to the hard
disk because that doesn't scale very well.
In the realm of databases,
there's two different kinds,
there's relational databases.
So relational database is our MySQL,
SQL Lite, Postgres, SQL Server, etcetera.
There's even a browser
database called index.DB.
A lot of people don't know that, there's a
database built into your browser that you
can use, it's kind of a pain but
databases are generally kind of a pain,
that's why we have
libraries on top of them.
So relational databases are very
structured, they're very strict,
they have strong opinions about how and
where you write and retrieve data?
And this is good,
the other kind of database is
Non-relational databases.
So non-relational databases also have
a structure, but it's a lot looser.
And these are commonly known as NoSQL
databases, which is I don't know,
you're still using some sort of query
language no matter what you're doing.
But the benefits of relational
versus non-relational,
relational is kind of it's type systems.
You can write your JavaScript code
in just pure plain JavaScript or
you can write with TypeScript.
There's pros and cons to both if you use
typing's it's gonna be a lot stricter it's
gonna throw up a lot more errors and
it won't let you do all the things
you wanna do and
sometimes that's a good thing.
That's the same thing about relational
databases, they're very strict and
you have to do things a certain way.
Whereas, non-relational databases is
much more free, you can just dump things
into them and query them back out and
there's pros and cons of both.
No, SQL tends to be a little bit faster
because there's not a whole structure
it has to run through every
time you make a query but
again, you don't have the structure,
so that's a protocol.
Today we're gonna be using
a relational database, because that's
probably the one that trips up people
the most when they see the syntax of SQL.
And relational databases is made
of three different parts, really.
They're made up of tables, so there's
always tables of data, in this case,
it would be called the users table.
Those tables have fields.
Fields are also known as columns, so
think tabular data, it's a column.
Those columns have rows or
they're also called records here.
And you're like, that's great,
that's a table, there's some rows,
there's some columns, I've seen a table
before, Jem, how does this all make sense?
Well, when we have multiple tables
of data, we have to get them
to relate to each other somehow,
hence the relational database part.
In this case, user ID is known as
your primary ID or primary key,
every single table has a primary key.
The primary key is usually
an incremented number or
some random hash it doesn't really matter,
but
it's unique to that row in that table and
we can query against it very quickly.
Now, if you wanna have
a primary key in another table,
that's known as the, anybody?
Anybody takes SQL here?
>> Secondary key.
>> Close, secondary key,
you think that, foreign key.
So a primary key in a different
database or in different tables,
is just called the foreign key and
again, we can query off that again.
If we see it in our food,
our food table, how it relates
to the user table is that
the food has some sort of ID that
says my favorite food is ramen,
which it is the type of ramen.
I'm a fan of Tonkatsu.
It's an katsu, spicy not generally, but
that's an entirely different table.
It's a table of everybody's
favorite foods, but
it doesn't tell you anything
about who's in it, is it mine?
Is it Kyle's?
Whose is it?
We can use the user ID as the foreign key
and we jump back to the user table and
that will tell us the name,
where we're at the location, the email.
So hopefully you're seeing
the power of relational databases,
where you have a bunch of table of kind
of disjointed data but you make it
all tie together so that when we write
a query and we can write a complex query.
We can pull a lot of
information together using SQL,
which is structured query language.
So if I wanna select just all the
information about myself from the users
table, I would say select star,
star is just the wildcard for
everything from users tables,
where the name equals Jem.
Probably the easiest
example of SQL will write.
Usually, things get a lot more complicated
because we want information from
multiple tables of data, but
we wanna tie them all together.
So we use something called a JOIN.
There's different types of JOINS, I will
not go into JOINS it's a whole thing,
there's people here laughing because
you've probably dealt with SQL JOINS at
some point and it's a pain in the butt
unless you do it every single day.
But here's an example of JOIN
where I was talking about Robin.
I want to find all
the difference users and
the type of food from the food
table where the food name is ramen.
So we have to LEFT JOIN the two tables
together, the food and the user's data.
And then once we get the output,
we get the data from two different tables,
we put it together, and
it looks like just one big column of data.
So you take this concept of relational
database and blow it up even more.
You see, you can make some really,
really complex queries but at the core,
the data you're saving, and reading and
writing is actually pretty simple,
the tables are very structured.
And there is, of course, a, entire
course on Frontend Masters on databases.
If you wanna go really, rally deep, but
I bring up SQL and relational databases,
because a lot of Frontend engineers get
sucked on SQL because they're like,
what does this mean?
I don't understand what's going on,
and really, if you understand table
structures, you get a better sense
of how to actually query data.